.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000  Internet Software Consortium.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this document for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM
.\" DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
.\" WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $Id: error.3,v 1.1 2000/06/23 00:30:11 jim Exp $
.\"
.Dd Jun 30, 2000
.Dt error 3
.Os BIND9 9
.ds vT BIND9 Programmer's Manual
.Sh NAME
.Nm isc__errno2result
.Nd map POSIX error codes to BIND9 error codes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <config.h>
 
.Fd #include <errno.h>
 
.Fd #include <isc/result.h>
 
.Fd #include "errno2result.h"
.Ft isc_result_t
.Fn isc__errno2result "int posixerrno"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn isc__errno2result
maps the POSIX error code
.Fa posixerrno
to its equivalent BIND9 error code.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
When 
.Fa posixerrno 
is set to the POSIX error codes
.Er ENOTDIR ,
.Er ELOOP ,
.Er EINVAL ,
.Er ENAMETOOLONG ,
and
.Er EBADF ,
.Fn isc__errno2result 
returns
.Er ISC_R_INVALIDFILE .
.Er ISC_R_FILENOTFOUND
is returned when
.Fa posixerrno 
is set to
.Er ENOENT .
A retun value of
.Er ISC_R_NOPERM
is produced when the POSIX error code is
.Er EACCES .
If
.Fa posixerrno
is set to
.Er EIO
.Fn isc__errno2result
returns
.Er ISC_R_IOERROR 
and if the error code is
.Er ENOMEM ,
.Er ISC_R_NOMEMORY 
is returned.
For all other values of
.Fa posixerrno ,
.Fn isc__errno2result
returns 
.Er ISC_R_UNEXPECTED .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr errno 2 ,
.Xr perror 3 
.Sh BUGS
Returning
.Er ISC_R_UNEXPECTED
for so many error codes is a little unhelpful.
It would be nice if
.Fn isc__errno2result
produced something more descriptive like the system's error string for
these error codes.
