.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001  Internet Software Consortium.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM
.\" DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
.\" WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $Id: lwres_getrrsetbyname.3,v 1.3.4.2 2001/06/14 06:20:58 tale Exp $
.\"
.Dd Oct 18, 2000
.Dt LWRES_GETRRSETBYNAME 3
.Os BIND9 9
.ds vT BIND9 Programmer's Manual
.Sh NAME
.Nm lwres_getrrsetbyname ,
.Nm lwres_freerrset
.Nd retrieve DNS records
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <lwres/netdb.h>
.Fd
.Ft int
.Fo lwres_getrrsetbyname
.Fa "const char *hostname"
.Fa "unsigned int rdclass"
.Fa "unsigned int rdtype"
.Fa "unsigned int flags"
.Fa "struct rrsetinfo **res"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo lwres_freerrset
.Fa "struct rrsetinfo *rrset"
.Fc
.Pp
The following structures are used:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct 	rdatainfo {
	unsigned int		rdi_length;	/* length of data */
	unsigned char		*rdi_data;	/* record data */
};

struct	rrsetinfo {
	unsigned int		rri_flags;	/* RRSET_VALIDATED... */
	unsigned int		rri_rdclass;	/* class number */
	unsigned int		rri_rdtype;	/* RR type number */
	unsigned int		rri_ttl;	/* time to live */
	unsigned int		rri_nrdatas;	/* size of rdatas array */
	unsigned int		rri_nsigs;	/* size of sigs array */
	char			*rri_name;	/* canonical name */
	struct rdatainfo	*rri_rdatas;	/* individual records */
	struct rdatainfo	*rri_sigs;	/* individual signatures */
};
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
.Fn lwres_getrrsetbyname
gets a set of resource records associated with a
.Fa hostname ,
.Fa class ,
and
.Fa type .
.Fa hostname
is
a pointer a to null-terminated string.  The
.Fa flags
field is currently unused and must be zero.
.Pp
After a successful call to
.Fn lwres_getrrsetbyname ,
.Fa *res
is a pointer to an
.Dv rrsetinfo
structure, containing a list of one or more
.Dv rdatainfo
structures containing resource records and potentially another list of
.Dv rdatainfo
structures containing SIG resource records
associated with those records.
The members
.Li rri_rdclass
and
.Li rri_rdtype
are copied from the parameters.
.Li rri_ttl
and
.Li rri_name
are properties of the obtained rrset.
The resource records contained in
.Li rri_rdatas
and
.Li rri_sigs
are in uncompressed DNS wire format.
Properties of the rdataset are represented in the
.Li rri_flags
bitfield.  If the RRSET_VALIDATED bit is set, the data has been DNSSEC
validated and the signatures verified.  
.Pp
All of the information returned by
.Fn lwres_getrrsetbyname
is dynamically allocated: the
.Li rrsetinfo
and
.Li rdatainfo
structures,
and the canonical host name strings pointed to by the
.Li rrsetinfo structure.
Memory allocated for the dynamically allocated structures created by
a successful call to
.Fn lwres_getrrsetbyname
is released by
.Fn lwres_freerrset .
.Fa rrset
is a pointer to a
.Dv "struct rrset"
created by a call to
.Fn lwres_getrrsetbyname .
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn lwres_getrrsetbyname
returns zero on success or an error code if an error occurs.  The defined
error codes are ERRSET_NOMEMORY (memory could not be allocated),
ERRSET_INVAL (a parameter is invalid) and ERRSET_FAIL (other failure).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lwres 3 .
