.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001  Internet Software Consortium.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM
.\" DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
.\" WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $Id: lwres_getaddrinfo.3,v 1.7.4.2 2001/06/14 06:20:53 tale Exp $
.\"
.Dd Jun 30, 2000
.Dt LWRES_GETADDRINFO 3
.Os BIND9 9
.ds vT BIND9 Programmer's Manual
.Sh NAME
.Nm lwres_getaddrinfo ,
.Nm lwres_freeaddrinfo
.Nd socket address structure to host and service name
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <lwres/netdb.h>
.Fd
.Ft int
.Fo lwres_getaddrinfo
.Fa "const char *hostname"
.Fa "const char *servname"
.Fa "const struct addrinfo *hints"
.Fa "struct addrinfo **res"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo lwres_freeaddrinfo
.Fa "struct addrinfo *ai"
.Fc
.Pp
If the operating system does not provide a
.Dv "struct addrinfo" ,
the following structure is used:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct	addrinfo {
	int		ai_flags;	/* AI_PASSIVE, AI_CANONNAME */
	int		ai_family;	/* PF_xxx */
	int		ai_socktype;	/* SOCK_xxx */
	int		ai_protocol;	/* 0 or IPPROTO_xxx for IPv4 and IPv6 */
	size_t		ai_addrlen;	/* length of ai_addr */
	char		*ai_canonname;	/* canonical name for hostname */
	struct sockaddr	*ai_addr; 	/* binary address */
	struct addrinfo	*ai_next; 	/* next structure in linked list */
};
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo
is used to get a list of IP addresses and port numbers for host
.Fa hostname
and service
.Fa servname .
The function is the lightweight resolver's implementation of
.Fn getaddrinfo
as defined in RFC2133.
.Fa hostname
and
.Fa servname
are pointers to null-terminated
strings or
.Dv NULL .
.Fa hostname
is either a host name or a numeric host address string: a dotted decimal
IPv4 address or an IPv6 address.
.Fa servname
is either a decimal port number or a service name as listed in
.Pa /etc/services .
.Pp
.Fa hints
is an optional pointer to a
.Dv "struct addrinfo" .
This structure can be used to provide hints concerning the type of socket
that the caller supports or wishes to use.
The caller can supply the following structure elements in
.Fa *hints :
.Bl -tag -width ai_socktyp  -offset indent -compact
.It Li ai_family
the protocol family that should be used.
When
.Li ai_family
is set to
.Dv PF_UNSPEC ,
it means the caller will accept any protocol family supported by the
operating system.
.It Dv ai_socktype
denotes the type of socket -
.Dv SOCK_STREAM ,
.Dv SOCK_DGRAM
or
.Dv SOCK_RAW
- that is wanted.
When
.Li ai_socktype
is zero the caller will accept any socket type.
.It Li ai_protocol
indicates which transport protocol is wanted: IPPROTO_UDP or 
IPPROTO_TCP.
If
.Li ai_protocol
is zero the caller will accept any protocol.
.It Li ai_flags
Flag bits.
If the
.Dv AI_CANONNAME
bit is set, a successful call to
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo
will return a a null-terminated string containing the canonical name
of the specified hostname in
.Li ai_canonname
of the first
.Dv addrinfo
structure returned.
Setting the
.Dv AI_PASSIVE
bit indicates that the returned socket address structure is intended
for used in a call to
.Xr bind 2 .
In this case, if the hostname argument is a
.Dv NULL
pointer, then the IP address portion of the socket
address structure will be set to
.Dv INADDR_ANY
for an IPv4 address or
.Dv IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT
for an IPv6 address.
.Pp
When
.Li ai_flags
does not set the
.Dv AI_PASSIVE
bit, the returned socket address structure will be ready
for use in a call to
.Xr connect 2
for a connection-oriented protocol or
.Xr connect 2 ,
.Xr sendto 2 ,
or
.Xr sendmsg 2
if a connectionless protocol was chosen.
The IP address portion of the socket address structure will be
set to the loopback address if
.Fa hostname
is a
.Dv NULL
pointer and
.Dv AI_PASSIVE
is not set in
.Li ai_flags .
.Pp
If
.Li ai_flags
is set to
.Dv AI_NUMERICHOST
it indicates that
.Fa hostname
should be treated as a numeric string defining an IPv4 or IPv6 address
and no name resolution should be attempted.
.El
.Pp
All other elements of the
.Dv "struct addrinfo"
passed via
.Fa hints
must be zero.
.Pp
A
.Fa hints
of
.Dv NULL
is treated as if the caller provided a
.Dv "struct addrinfo"
initialized to zero with
.Li ai_family set to
.Li PF_UNSPEC .
.Pp
After a successful call to
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo ,
.Fa *res
is a pointer to a linked list of one or more
.Dv addrinfo
structures.
Each
.Dv "struct addrinfo" 
in this list cn be processed by following
the
.Li ai_next
pointer, until a
.Dv NULL
pointer is encountered.
The three members
.Li ai_family ,
.Li ai_socktype ,
and
.Li ai_protocol
in each
returned
.Dv addrinfo
structure contain the corresponding arguments for a call to
.Xr socket 2 .
For each
.Dv addrinfo
structure in the list, the
.Li ai_addr
member points to a filled-in socket address structure of length
.Li ai_addrlen .
.Pp
All of the information returned by
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo
is dynamically allocated: the addrinfo structures, and the socket
address structures and canonical host name strings pointed to by the
.Li addrinfo structures.
Memory allocated for the dynamically allocated structures created by
a successful call to
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo
is released by
.Fn lwres_freeaddrinfo .
.Fa ai
is a pointer to a
.Dv "struct addrinfo" 
created by a call to
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo
returns zero on success or one of the error codes listed in
.Xr gai_strerror 3
if an error occurs.
If both
.Fa hostname
and
.Fa servname
are
.Dv NULL
.Fn lwres_getaddrinfo
returns
.Er EAI_NONAME .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lwres 3 ,
.Xr lwres_getaddrinfo 3 ,
.Xr lwres_freeaddrinfo 3 ,
.Xr lwres_gai_strerror 3 ,
.Xr RFC2133 ,
.Xr getservbyname 3 ,
.Xr bind 2 ,
.Xr connect 2 ,
.Xr sendto 2 ,
.Xr sendmsg 2 ,
.Xr socket 2 .
