.\" Copyright (C) 2000  Internet Software Consortium.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM
.\" DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
.\" WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $Id: lwres_inetpton.3,v 1.3 2000/08/01 01:21:42 tale Exp $
.\"
.Dd Jun 30, 2000
.Dt LWRES_INETPTON 3
.Os BIND9 9
.ds vT BIND9 Programmer's Manual
.Sh NAME
.Nm lwres_net_pton
.Nd lightweight resolver IP address conversion
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <lwres/net.h>
.Fd
.Ft int
.Fo lwres_net_pton
.Fa "int af"
.Fa "const char *src"
.Fa "void *dst"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn lwres_net_pton
converts the presentation format of an IP address
.Fa src
to its representation in network format.
.Fa af
indicates the protocol family for the address
.Dv PF_INET
or
.Dv PF_INET6
and
.Fa src
is either a dotted decimal string for an IPv4 address or
a string in colon notation if it represents an IPv6 address.
RFC1884 defines the text notation to represent IPv6 addresses.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn lwres_net_pton
returns 1 if address
.Fa src
was valid for protocol family
.Fa af .
The network representation of the address is returned in
.Fa *dst .
Zero is returned if the address was invalid and -1 is returned if some
other error occurred.
.Fa *dst
is not altered for either of these errors.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr inet_pton 3 ,
.Xr RFC1884 .
