.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001  Internet Software Consortium.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM
.\" DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
.\" WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.

.\" $Id: lwres_resutil.3,v 1.4.4.1 2001/01/09 22:43:05 bwelling Exp $

.Dd Jun 30, 2000
.Dt LWRES_RESUTIL 3
.Os BIND9 9
.ds vT BIND9 Programmer's Manual
.Sh NAME
.Nm lwres_string_parse ,
.Nm lwres_addr_parse ,
.Nm lwres_getaddrsbyname ,
.Nm lwres_getnamebyaddr
.Nd lightweight resolver utility functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <lwres/lwres.h>
.Fd
.Ft lwres_result_t
.Fo lwres_string_parse
.Fa "lwres_buffer_t *b"
.Fa "char **c"
.Fa "lwres_uint16_t *len"
.Fc
.Ft lwres_result_t
.Fo lwres_addr_parse
.Fa "lwres_buffer_t *b"
.Fa "lwres_addr_t *addr"
.Fc
.Ft lwres_result_t
.Fo lwres_getaddrsbyname
.Fa "lwres_context_t *ctx"
.Fa "const char *name"
.Fa "lwres_uint32_t addrtypes"
.Fa "lwres_gabnresponse_t **structp"
.Fc
.Ft lwres_result_t
.Fo lwres_getnamebyaddr
.Fa "lwres_context_t *ctx"
.Fa "lwres_uint32_t addrtype"
.Fa "lwres_uint16_t addrlen"
.Fa "const unsigned char *addr"
.Fa "lwres_gnbaresponse_t **structp"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn lwres_string_parse
retrieves a DNS-encoded string starting the current pointer of
lightweight resolver buffer
.Fa b :
i.e.
.Li b->current .
When the function returns, the address of the first byte of the
encoded string is returned via
.Fa *c
and the length of that string is given by
.Fa *len .
The buffer's current pointer is advanced to point at the character
following the string length, the encoded string, and the trailing
.Dv NULL
character.
.Fn lwres_string_parse
has an assertion check that
.Fa b
is not
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
.Fn lwres_addr_parse
extracts an address from the buffer
.Fa b .
It checks that
.Fa addr
is not null.
The buffer's current pointer
.Li b->current
is presumed to point at an encoded address: the address preceded by a
32-bit protocol family identifier and a 16-bit length field.
The encoded address is copied to
.Li addr->address
and
.Li addr->length
indicates the size in bytes of the address that was copied.
.Li b->current
is advanced to point at the next byte of available data in the buffer
following the encoded address.
.Pp
.Fn lwres_getaddrsbyname
and
.Fn lwres_getnamebyaddr
use the
.Dv "lwres_gnbaresponse_t"
structure defined below:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef struct {
	lwres_uint32_t		flags;
	lwres_uint16_t		naliases;
	lwres_uint16_t		naddrs;
	char		       *realname;
	char		      **aliases;
	lwres_uint16_t		realnamelen;
	lwres_uint16_t	       *aliaslen;
	lwres_addrlist_t	addrs;
	void		       *base;
	size_t			baselen;
} lwres_gabnresponse_t;
.Ed
The contents of this structure are not manipulated directly but
they are controlled through the
.Xr lwres_gabn 3
functions.
.Pp
The lightweight resolver uses
.Fn lwres_getaddrsbyname
to perform foward lookups.
Hostname
.Fa name
is looked up using the resolver context
.Fa ctx
for memory allocation.
.Fa addrtypes
is a bitmask indicating which type of addresses are to be looked up.
Current values for this bitmask are
.Dv LWRES_ADDRTYPE_V4
for IPv4 addresses and
.Dv LWRES_ADDRTYPE_V6
for IPv6 addresses.
Results of the lookup are returned in
.Fa *structp .
.Fn lwres_getaddrsbyname
checks that its pointer arguments are not
.Dv NULL
and that
.Fa addrtypes
is non-zero.
.Pp
.Fn lwres_getnamebyaddr
performs reverse lookups.
Resolver context
.Fa ctx
is used for memory allocation.
The address type is indicated by
.Fa addrtype :
.Dv LWRES_ADDRTYPE_V4
or
.Dv LWRES_ADDRTYPE_V6 .
The address to be looked up is given by
.Fa addr
and its length is
.Fa addrlen
bytes.
The result of the function call is made available through
.Fa *structp .
Like
.Fn lwres_getaddrsbyname ,
.Fn lwres_getnamebyaddr
uses assertion checking to ensure its pointer arguments are not
.Dv NULL
and
.Fa addrtype
is not zero.
.Fn lwres_getaddrsbyname
also checks that
.Fa addrlen
is non-zero.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Successful calls to
.Fn lwres_string_parse
and
.Fn lwres_addr_parse
return
.Er LWRES_R_SUCCESS.
Both functions return
.Er LWRES_R_FAILURE
if the buffer is corrupt or
.Er LWRES_R_UNEXPECTEDEND
if the buffer has less space than expected for the components of the
encoded string or address.
.Pp
.Fn lwres_getaddrsbyname
returns
.Er LWRES_R_SUCCESS
on success and it returns
.Er LWRES_R_NOTFOUND
if the hostname
.Fa name
could not be found.
.Pp
.Er LWRES_R_SUCCESS
is returned by a successful call to
.Fn lwres_getnamebyaddr .
.Pp
Both
.Fn lwres_getaddrsbyname
and
.Fn lwres_getnamebyaddr
return
.Er LWRES_R_NOMEMORY
when memory allocation requests fail and
.Er LWRES_R_UNEXPECTEDEND
if the buffers used for sending queries and receiving replies are too
small.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lwres_buffer 3 ,
.Xr lwres_gabn 3 .
