.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001  Internet Software Consortium.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM
.\" DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
.\" FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
.\" NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
.\" WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $Id: lwres_inetntop.3,v 1.4.4.2 2001/06/14 06:21:01 tale Exp $
.\"
.Dd Jun 30, 2000
.Dt LWRES_INETNTOP 3
.Os BIND9 9
.ds vT BIND9 Programmer's Manual
.Sh NAME
.Nm lwres_net_ntop
.Nd lightweight resolver IP address presentation
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <lwres/net.h>
.Fd
.Ft const char *
.Fo lwres_net_ntop
.Fa "int af"
.Fa "const void *src"
.Fa "char *dst"
.Fa "size_t size"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn lwres_net_ntop
converts an IP address of protocol family
.Fa af
- IPv4 or IPv6 - at location
.Fa src
from network format to its conventional representation as a string.
For IPv4 addresses, that string would be a dotted-decimal.
An IPv6 address would be represented in colon notation as described in
RFC1884.
.Pp
The generated string is copied to
.Fa dst
provided
.Fa size
indicates it is long enough to store the ASCII representation
of the address.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Pp
If successful, the function returns
.Fa dst :
a pointer to a string containing
the presentation format of the address.
.Fn lwres_net_ntop
returns
.Dv NULL
and sets the global variable
.Li errno
to
.Er EAFNOSUPPORT
if the protocol family given in
.Fa af
is not supported.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr RFC1884 ,
.Xr inet_ntop 3 ,
.Xr errno 3 .
